Hey there, welcome to the Paws at Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I am so excited to welcome our featured leader
for today, Ross Farrugia, Data and Insights Engineering Product Family Lead at Roche
slash Genentech. And I will let him explain what that slash Genentech means. Ross, would
you like to unmute and introduce yourself? Tell us a little bit about what you do and
also what you like to do for fun. Sure. Hi, Libby. Thanks for having me along.
So yeah, the slash Genentech is our kind of U.S. company, but we merged with Roche many
years back now. So most of the folks in U.S. will have known Genentech, but you might not
have heard of Roche so much because it's a Swiss company. In the rest of the world, and
especially in Europe, Roche is a lot bigger name. So yeah, it's Roche slash Genentech.
So my role involves supporting kind of overseeing a lot of data science tooling in the clinical
reporting space. So all of the tooling that we use for analysis about clinical trials.
So I sponsor packages in the open source space, such as Admiral, or maybe people have heard
of Teal for helping to create shiny visualizations. And in my spare time, apart from chasing around
my young children, I like to play football or soccer as the U.S. folks would call it.
Yeah, that's my main passion. Awesome. And I feel like I don't know if I heard you say
this in your intro, but if you didn't mention it, you're one of the co-founders of Pharmiverse.
Yeah, absolutely. So if anybody hasn't heard of Pharmiverse, this is essentially an open
source effort for the pharmaceutical industry to bring companies together who, in the past,
we were all doing very similar things in this post-competitive space. So once the drugs
have been identified, essentially you have to run the clinical trials, and that unites
the clinical trials, build the submission packages that are going to go to the health
authorities. We're lucky that we have very harmonized industry level standards from an
organization called CDISC. But yeah, we were all still working in silos, doing very similar
activity, but each company repeating the same work. So Pharmiverse was an effort built
initially around R, but we're also open to Python and other open source languages. And
we've grown to have eight council companies involved. We have 400 co-contributors. And
in our community, we have almost 2,000 people and many more using our packages. So essentially,
bringing companies together to, instead of repeating the same work independently, we now
co-develop and share the build effort, share the maintenance effort, share the testing effort,
to build code, which is ultimately going to help to bring all drugs to patients a lot quicker in
the future. And it's not just us that can use the solutions. Also, the health authorities are open
to use them. So it even helps to improve and accelerate the review and approval process.
This is a little bit of an answer to Mike's question in Slido. So Mike, if you wanted to
unmute and ask a little bit about this, because your question sort of expands a little bit on
that. Yeah. I mean, hi, Ross. One question I had was like, people might be familiar with a CRAN
task view, where basically you're saying, here's a set of packages that are associated with a
public or a specific data area. So how is Pharmaverse kind of different from a task view?
Yeah, that's a great question. I can actually, in the early days, from a lot of our traditionalists
were saying, you just do a CRAN task view. That'll be enough. And yeah, it's a great question.
What we realized, though, is in the early stage of our adoption across our industry,
we needed a little bit more. We needed to build a community around this. And actually, what we
wanted, instead of having just packages where individuals from solo companies were kind of
putting something out there, as well as I do in our industry, takes a little bit more for you to
adopt and trust. So say Pfizer put out a package, and my company, Roche, we would look at it and
think, hey, do we really want to trust that? Do we really want to embed that in our workflows that
ultimately are going to go towards submissions? But what about if we can come in and work with
Pfizer and we can share the effort, we can become co-licensed holders and ultimately share that IP,
it's a lot more likely then that you're going to take ownership and you're actually going to
believe and trust that. And then it gets to the point where you have things like Admiral now,
where we've got 10 co-development companies behind the Admiral package. And then companies
that aren't even co-developers, they're more likely to trust it because they're saying, hey,
Roche and I are going to pull out now. Or even if they do, there's nine other companies there,
that are maintaining this. So with something like open source, where I think the fear is always that
it's not going to be sustainable. And people are going to put something great out and it'll just be
one person behind it. And then six months later, they'll find something new to attract their time.
And then it disappears. With a community like Farmiverse, for a start, there is such a package,
but we already like it. We can find members of the community that can help to maintain it.
But generally, we prefer that from the start, these things are built with numerous companies,
numerous individuals, and then you tend to get better solutions because they all bring their
individual experience and you build something that's not just fit for one, but potentially fit
for all. I hope that helps. Yeah. Can I ask a quick follow on, which is about curation. So do
you have some curators or some kind of people providing a little bit of overview? Yeah, we used
to have working groups dedicated to different areas like data engineering and tables and graphs,
visualizations, and they would be the ones that would ultimately kind of decide what goes in
the Farmiverse. And we started off trying to be quite opinionated, right? We didn't want
lots of repeat packages doing the same thing, things like that. Actually, over time, what we
decided was let's just democratize this across the whole community. We've got like almost 2,000
people in this Slack. Let's let them all have a say. So now if anybody approaches us and they say,
hey, I wanted to add my package to Farmiverse, I'd like to come in and work with you,
we open it up to the whole community to say, hey, do you like this? People comment, people say, oh,
it would be really nice to fill this gap or to enhance it this way. And then quite often,
the maintainer of the package says, okay, come and be a contributor, come work with me. And yeah,
it's kind of nice because a lot of the time what we're doing now is just connecting people across
the industry that they were going to build that solution anyway. They didn't need us, but we can
help them to supercharge it by bringing more people into that work. So it's become like it's
lightly curated because as long as the community are happy, we're happy. We do have some inclusion
criteria, of course, as well that we try to monitor. But yeah, generally, it's becoming
to the point where it doesn't need us so much now. Like in the early days, we were the ones
kind of banging the drum and make sure now it's become like a really natural kind of ecosystem
and a natural community, which is what we always hoped it would be.
Thank you, Mike. Thanks for the great question. And thanks, Ross.
We have a lot of questions that are about the farm river. So I'm wondering if we
could maybe combine a couple of them. I wanted to pull Lisa in because I know that this question
is sort of the same lines that we've been talking about right now. But I want to engage the whole
sort of community here in this and talk about this in the chat because Lisa's question is a
little bit more expensive. Yeah. So I was just curious about, you know, I love this idea of
sort of taking competing companies but coming together to solve a common goal. And I'm just,
I would love to see this in other industries. So I'm just curious how the heck you did that.
How do you convince people from competing companies to be like, yeah, we'll work on this
together? I mean, I think I'm in the insurance industry right now and I just I sort of can't
imagine how that would happen. But I assume we might have some really similar similarities.
Absolutely. So when we first we first spoke to our legal group, actually, and leadership's another
thing, company leadership. But we went to legal first because the first thing any company feels
is, OK, what's your actual intellectual property? What's the stuff that, you know, is actually kind
of making you money around and you don't want to ever open that up to others. And we had a really
great IP expert lawyer and he's very progressive thinking and very kind of an open source enthusiast.
And the way that he talked us through is that, OK, what value is there to open source and are you
by open sourcing, by bringing this together with other companies, are you ultimately going to get
more in return than what you invest? And we said, look, even if only if we do this and only one
company across the whole of our industry steps up and gives what we're given, then we cut our
development and maintenance budget by 50 percent. So we just need one. So, OK, go find that one.
Go find someone who can meet you halfway and let's give this a try. Let's make this,
you know, make a pitch to our leadership to show that this has potential. We were very lucky in that
a colleague from GSK actually was on LinkedIn and was messaging similar and made a connection
with somebody from my team. And it kind of snowballed from there. So we thought, OK,
let's prove it. And the first piece that we really looked to do this in was a piece of work where we
hadn't actually put pen to paper. We hadn't developed any code at that time. So it was
like a no risk strategy, right? Either it doesn't work and we're no worse off than when we started
or through working together as one as one team, not like, OK, we'll do half the work over here.
You do half the work over there and then we'll throw it over the fence. No,
let's work openly together on public GitHub repo where we're all in it from the start,
open from the start. And we're just amazed. Firstly, that one company really stepped up
and met us halfway. But then what we did is we reached out to leaders from across the industry
and said, hey, we have this idea. Would you be willing to bring people forward?
And you don't have to develop right now, but just test out what we're building. Tell us,
is this suitable for your needs? And we asked a number of companies. We were amazed that over
10 companies stepped up and ended up with like 40 people testing. We had thousands of comments,
loads of really useful things that helped us. And this was just one package and really helped
us to go into that design. And from there, we started to reach out and understand, well,
there's already a number of other companies doing similar stuff in other areas of the work that we
do that we're also interested. So once you get one win, you show your leadership, they buy in,
they invest in you more, and they start to make more and more connections. And you find the
like-minded people. They're going to be whatever industry. They're going to be people that believe
in the greater good and that a rising tide lifts all boats. Sometimes it's just finding them and
having that time. So yeah, in a nutshell, that's like a little bit of the story of how we've gone.
Does that help, Lisa? I think that she might not be able to unmute herself to say thank you,
but I think that the answer is yes. And I see some nodding. So I think that that's great.
And this is definitely one of those things that is a problem across all industries, not a problem,
a challenge, right? Like how do we convince leadership of doing things that feels like
giving away their IP or giving away power or giving away money when it's good for everybody?
All right. Thank you, Lisa, for the wonderful question. Let's see what other questions we have
here. And don't forget, everybody, you have a place to ask your questions on Slido and also
upvote other questions. So go scroll through what other people are asking. I wanted to ask
a little bit of an industry question. So Abigail, you have a question here that is a little bit more
industry focused. Would you like to ask that live? Oh, nope. You have an asterisk. I see that you
added. Okay. I'm going to ask Abigail's question for her. Ross, what does career progression look
like in your industry? Where can data scientists go for either leadership or IC roles? And I think
this is a great question for you because I had the same question for you when I first talked to
you. I was like, hey, were you in people leadership and now you're in like a more product or project
leadership role? How did that happen? So maybe we could combine those together.
Yeah, that's a great question. And we get this a lot in our industry because it's quite a technical
career, you know, data scientists, but there's obviously a lot of kind of people leadership
naturally needed. There's a lot of kind of project management tasks as well. So you can go numerous
routes. We all tend to start with the technical route. We want to learn the basics. We want to
really understand clinical trials and how to do analysis. And then as we progress, you tend to go
one of two ways. Either you're progressing kind of leadership where you start to kind of
oversee teams of people, project manage deliveries, and then you may be going to
people line management, very different, and or maybe go on the more technical route where you
get more and more advanced technical skills and you take on larger projects. So instead of writing
code per se, it's going to be used by a team of five people, you end up writing code that's going
to be used in a product for 1000 plus people. So it becomes a very different like level of skills
that you have to have to build software versus building just like single use code. In my experience,
or my personal journey, I went the more the leadership route. So I became a line manager
in our statistical programming group. I was there for five years, I really, really enjoyed it. I loved
working with people, helping them to develop and helping them to make the best of themselves.
But actually, it got to a point where we had a reorganization. And I got an opportunity to move
sideways into more of a product leadership role and into a very technical group. And I've really
enjoyed that as well, because I've stretched myself so much, I moved away a little bit from
the technical side, getting back in now and seeing how in just those five years, all the tech
has advanced so much. And now we've got AI coming and all these great advancements
that actually enabled me to get back to some of my earlier passion and get back involved there,
whilst also still overseeing teams still leading product deliveries, but not having the people
management side of things. So yeah, there's lots of opportunities. And it depends on the way you
want to go. I've got colleagues as well that have gone into totally different areas of the business
using that kind of technical acumen to actually move into some of the more non-technical groups
that could benefit from knowledge of data scientists. So yeah, in large companies like
the one that I worked for, you generally find numerous pathways and there's no one size fits
all. Well, this sort of leads into another question that we got that's anonymous. So Abigail,
fantastic question, leads us into the anonymous question is, is it possible to break into the
pharma world if you are a data scientist slash statistician with no experience there? I'm guessing
that means no experience in pharma directly. And do you have any recommendations? So on the people
side, like one of my proudest things of PharmaVest is that PharmaVest is there for the patients.
Ultimately, we're doing this to help to speed up all drug submissions, not just the ones from
Rostran and Teck. We're trying to help all companies to do submissions quicker and ultimately
get treatments to patients all over the world a lot faster. Actually, on the people side though,
I've been really like proud to see where folks that aren't in the pharma industry have heard
about this, and especially kind of younger generations, like, you know, they really want
to see open source thrive and pharma doesn't have the greatest reputation for many reasons.
So it's really nice to see a younger generation being attracted to our industry, and then through
the open source collaborations, actually finding opportunities to jump in and learn the skills that
will then be able to go on to their resumes and help them to find employment. So it's very nice
when you see somebody says, hey, I've been learning R, I've done it in academia, but I have no idea of
the standards that we use, the kind of data standards that we use. I have no idea what you
mean by clinical reporting, building analysis data sets called Adam, and, you know, very specific
industry terms, but because they're passionate and they know enough about R, they can add some value,
they get started with the good first issues, the, you know, the real beginner kind of things,
and naturally the teams that they join are then willing to give back to them and to help say, hey,
go read, there's open training where you can learn those skills here, and people actually
helping them to upskill in those new areas. And yeah, through this, we've seen a number of people
come to the industry where they wouldn't have considered pharmaceutical in the past. So yeah,
it's been really nice to see that anybody through open source can get involved, and it's daunting
at first, but I appreciate kind of just reaching out to people and kind of commenting on an issue
and GitHub saying, hey, I'd like to help. It can be daunting, but I can definitely say within the
pharmaverse, there's a lot of teams that are really looking for that, and they're very willing
to bring new people in and to help them to grow. That's awesome. Do you see a sort of
role inside of pharma organizations or teams that looks a lot like contributing to an open
source package? I know I've met some people in pharma who are like, my whole job is actually
just building and maintaining data tools in our packages for teams, and I've actually seen
that in other scientific organizations as well, not just with pharmaceutical. So is it a good
one-to-one, like if you really enjoy contributing to these open source packages, maybe there's a
job that sort of looks like that in pharma? Absolutely. So firstly, the group I work in,
the technical group, we have around 50 people, and majority are building tools, not only in R,
but Python and other languages as well. But yeah, the majority of us are doing work very
much like that, software development. But then also, we get a lot of people who are actually
users of our tools. So the ones that are actually working on the clinical studies day-to-day and
using our tools to run patient data analysis, they're actually starting to lean into the open
source development as well, because they're loving the fact that learning software development
techniques is actually helping them with their day jobs. So you can learn things like unit testing,
just to throw one out there, which is going to really help you. That's a skill that can really
help at any level of coding. So yeah, definitely, there are opportunities there. And an industry as
huge as this, there always is going to be. And data science, the value of data, it's at an all-time
high. And when I joined the industry around 20 years ago, we were the folks in the corner that
nobody wanted to speak to. We were like, hey, don't speak to those geeks. But it's really changed
now. We can definitely see that data and data science has a huge value, because people can see
that by using our skills, we can unlock more value for the company. And now that AI is here,
and that's getting so much attention, they even come into us more, saying, hey, we need the techie
folks to help us to move our business forward. So it's a really exciting time for our industry,
but I'm sure a lot of other industries as well. It's very encouraging to me, because I feel like
a lot of people are like, I love doing this, but there's no way I'm going to be able to do this for
a job. Like, oh, I really like contributing to open source. I really like developing these packages.
And so whenever I meet people in pharma, I'm like, oh, that's where you should go, maybe,
if you want to develop open source stuff and have that be your job. All right. Thanks for indulging
that little very selfish question of mine. Thank you so much, anonymous question asker. Your
question was amazing. If that was you, drop me a line on LinkedIn and be like, hey, that was me.
All right. Let's go to Slido here and find another question for Ross. Thank you, everybody,
for all the wonderful questions so far. Don't forget that you can go upvote any questions
that you like. Let's see. Ah, let's see. Give me a second to read through some things.
Gregory, you have a question here that leads us in a slightly new direction.
Would you like to unmute and ask that one live if you're still with us?
Yeah, I can swing it. There he is. Hey, Greg.
I always feel like I talk about SaaS with my questions.
You do. It's okay.
I work with it every day, begrudgingly. But anyways, so how do you feel about the merging
between the R and Python communities when it comes to pharma? If you do see that,
I usually see whenever I talk to my pharma folks or anybody in the FDA or anybody over there,
they're using either SaaS or R. I don't know. I've kind of seen this trend recently,
especially with the Apache Aero ecosystem with analytics. You're really starting to see
the language wars not really exist. It's like open source or proprietary
is kind of what I'm starting to see. Do you feel like that's kind of something
you see on your side of the fence as well in R-Land?
Yeah, great question. One thing I'd say is I like to say I live in R-Land. I like to live
in open source land. You can absolutely open source that code as well and build into collaborations
around SaaS. So yeah, I'm not here to bash SaaS in any way. That's not my intention.
What I see a lot of movement in our industry is we used to call ourselves like SaaS programmers
or statistical programmers, and we used to be like very narrowly focused.
The beauty of this is just purely making a step outside, think outside the box,
and actually open ourselves up to new languages because we know there's going to be new languages
advancing all the time. So really when we're calling ourselves more like data scientists
now, it's just about kind of opening ourselves to becoming multilingual. So a lot of companies
in our industry aren't actually abandoning SaaS. They're just entertaining R and saying,
okay, what are the areas like Shiny where it adds real value? And then also, we're looking at things
like the form of those packages where there's a lot of reuse, but it just saves us doing something
ourselves and building our suite of SaaS micros that we would have had to build and maintain
ourselves in the past. So a lot of people are using SaaS and R, but you mentioned Python as well.
Python, of course, it adds value in numerous places like machine learning and other, and
sometimes in a build certain systems and tools, Python is way beyond R. Maybe not always.
I don't want to get into the Python versus R debate, but some of the statistical analysis
pieces are naturally seeming more advanced in R or more easy in R. Some of the visualization pieces
in R we're really liking, but actually there are definitely scope and people in the team that I
work with are definitely building tooling in Python. One thing that I would say though is,
people say, hey, yeah, and Farmiverse is open to Python as well. We've got a couple of Python
solutions, but some people say, hey, why are you going so hard into R and you're not going to say,
let's all learn R and Python at the same time? For that, you have to kind of understand the culture
of the group of people that we're working with are predominantly being SaaS programmers for many,
many years. Imagine if like the way we solved this change was, hey, you're going to become
data scientists, learn R and Python in the next six months, and then we'll tell you which one
we're going to use and which task we're going to use. It would have just scared people, right?
Because learning one new language, especially if you're kind of older, like I am, I've been around
for a long time, and then I used that for many years, it was daunting for me to think, hey,
I need to learn that language. They said, hey, you've got to learn two languages. That's like
a completely different selling proposition and it would have affected our change management.
So in reality, you had to look at, okay, the clinical reporting,
the clinical analysis and clinical trials, R does a great job. And for the most of those tools,
R packages, open source collaboration, that's going to give us what we need.
But there are areas as well where Python will give us something different. So let's invest,
let's see, okay, where's the value add, and then look at the solution. And I'm not convinced it'll
stop there. I'm sure, you know, I'm hearing already people on my team saying, hey, we've
got to check out Julia, we've got to check out Rust, we've got to check out this, that. So,
yeah, it's always going to evolve, but I hope that helps answer your question.
I think that was great, Ross. And I really want to put my sort of two cents in there and say,
I find such value in knowing more than one data science language. It feels very expansive and
powerful. And it is very daunting to think like, oh, man, one language is hard enough to know and
to feel expertise in. But knowing more than one, it just feels so powerful. And like, I don't feel
limited by my skill set. So anybody here who is a sort of polyglot, R plus Python plus Julia,
people like Mark Rieke is here, I know that he is, Marcos Huerta as well. They can tell you
probably the same thing. There's Marcos saying, yay, Julia. And we have somebody joining us,
Frank Hull, next week, who, I'm sure he'll talk about his sort of expansive polyglot skill set.
Alrighty, thank you so much, Gregory, for that fantastic question. And our next question is-
Literally, I was going to add real quickly, because I know when I ask people to unmute,
and then they mute again for their question, it doesn't let them like jump in to say like,
hey, thanks, or follow up. So I'll get better at asking people to unmute again,
if you want to add something. No pressure to have any response.
Yes, yes. We don't always want to silence you when you're going, thank you, Ross, for that answer.
Okay, we have another question. It is anonymous. Whoever asked this, thank you,
because it's wonderful. I love this question. I think Rachel does too.
And it's, do you have any top tips for contributing to open source? We just talked about how
that can be a gateway into a career, right? But this person says, I would like to, but I have
no idea how I would go about it. So I would love to know tips from you, Ross, tips from anybody in
the chat, go ahead and put them in. And then Rachel reminded me of something, which is wild
that I didn't even think about this, is that contributing to open source does not have to
always mean code. If you are a person who gets other people together, Rachel and I kind of do
that naturally all the time, that's also super valuable. If you're a person who can organize
things, organize people, organize events, bring folks together, spark conversations, or just get
people to work together on the same thing at the same time, project manage, all of those are super
valuable. So, Ross, how can someone get started contributing to open source if they've never done
it before? Yeah, great question. So Libby, I do actually have a blog on this topic and in the
Formula's blog site, so I'll share that with you later, and it'd be great if we could share that
link out with everybody after. Essentially, I see some folks commenting, definitely start small,
find something which you're passionate in, or you have some background experience, don't feel like
you have to be an expert, because you learn as you go, and be patient with yourself. I think
knowing some basic Git is very essential, so if you're coming at this totally new, you
don't know any background, learning Git, because most of the, especially Formula, so most of the
open source work I'm involved in will be on some kind of Git open organization, so understanding
Git is the way. You don't have to give code, as you said, so one really great way to start is just by
commenting on issues, by trying out packages, by raising issues, raising bugs, giving feedback,
that's a really good way to make connections as well, because often it's the connections you make
with the teams that then lead to them wanting to invest in you and help you to develop. Also,
when you do come to take your first issue, don't, I made this mistake, I went and took an issue that
ended up kind of affecting like five different R scripts that needed a bunch of testing,
and it was totally the wrong thing, because I almost got scared off from the start. Luckily,
I had really patient people around me, they helped me to understand, I made a bunch of mistakes,
and they were okay, like this is part of the learning curve, so they coached me, and they
helped me to understand where I'd gone wrong, but if you can start with like a really small issue,
so something like adding a few unit test cases, or something like that, where you can help them to
beef up their code coverage, or start really small, or the documentation kind of issues,
and then build up, build confidence, get to know the team. One of the best things about
kind of open source is that you actually get to meet people from all different backgrounds,
all different companies, and you do become like, you feel like an actual team, whereas
when you work internally with people, you know, hey, they're my colleagues, I'm meant to work
with them, you're all putting your own time, you're all doing this through passion, and it
makes such like a nice camaraderie, you're not there because you're getting all paid to do that,
and paid to be together, you'll get there because you have a shared interest, so enjoy the fun of
open source as well, and embrace those kind of relationships that you build. Yeah, the biggest
thing is just don't be scared, just put yourself out there, and people will be patient, they'll
understand that you're on a learning curve, be humble, be open, be transparent about where your
gaps are, people will help you to get there, they certainly did with me. Such a wonderful question,
whoever you are who asked this, thank you so much, and go look in the chat, go look at what
Catherine Gerton is saying, go look at Gregory's comments and Mike Smith's comments, start small,
documentation, helpful, great. Mike says, help write a vignette, the developer likely doesn't
appreciate how hard it is to pick up the package from scratch, so helping write that, getting
started with X package is a great way to contribute. I could not agree more. As a person who's approaching
a development project with fresh eyes, you have more power than the developer has in that moment
to actually write documentation. I'm a firm believer that the person who writes the thing,
or engineers the thing, should probably not write the documentation, because it's going to be full
of holes, but it's really, really humbling to approach this big thing and say, I don't understand
it. I encourage you to go ahead and do that anyway, because if you don't understand something,
there's a high chance somebody else doesn't, you could add help there, and I also want to remind
everybody that documentation is also open source, it's not private, you can go edit it, so like I'm
going to put in the chat here a link to the tidyverse dplyr main vignette, like you can go
do that, you could go like, I don't really like the Star Wars vignette, it's not helpful,
it doesn't explain how this function works, you could contribute and say, hey, here's an update
that makes it more valuable. Alrighty, wonderful questions so far, and there is an anonymous
question that is at the top, and it has five votes, it's a great question, I think we've already
covered it, so I'm going to go ahead and mark it as answered, it is about the sort of developer
experience in the pharma industry, it does have one part that's slightly unanswered, so I'll tack
that on here, and that is that they've heard the pharma industry can be more slow to build or adopt
new software, and they're wondering if that's true, so that's a quick one we can answer, do you feel
like that's the case? It's highly regulated, so you definitely have to be careful, right, we're
not going to be using a package which is kind of straight out of academia, and only one person has
ever kind of maintained it, and then putting that into our regulatory workflows, but ultimately,
you know, it's patient health at the end of the day, so you can't take chances, so absolutely,
there's a lot more when we talk about using open source, there'll be a lot more talk of
things like validation, and having like solid infrastructure, reproducibility, all of those
topics kind of come into it, so naturally, because of the work we do, yeah, there is a tendency to
move slow, I wouldn't say it's moving slow for like over cautiousness, I think it's just to
be sure, and to verify the important work that we do, in recent years though, I've definitely seen
more appetite to speed up, and more appetite to entertain risk, so one example is at Rush Genentech,
we started off with a kind of more manual validation process, but we now have an automated
validation pipeline, and that can kind of, yeah, very quickly, you can bring new packages into
our internal regulatory repo that users can use, and in most cases, actually, if you're choosing
the right package, which is quite an established package, like obviously things like the tidyverse,
naturally, it goes through really quickly, and yeah, it's not often that we actually have to
kind of put in a little bit extra effort to get over the validation hurdles, so yeah, I think
it's a fair comment, whoever put that in, but I'm, you know, finding the way we're moving faster than
than we ever have in the past. Awesome, yeah, and I think anybody in another highly regulated
industry, like Lisa was here earlier, in insurance will understand, yes, it moves very slow, but I
also think another component of that might be the age of companies inside of an industry, like the
banking industry, the insurance industry, when those companies have been around for a hundred years,
they are just like a bigger dinosaur that's moving more slowly, and changes slower to come,
because they're larger and older, so great question there, and I wanted to also call in
Pavel really quickly, or just bring everyone's attention to Pavel's comment in the chat, saying
hello, for one of the developers of FarmReverse packages, did we already mention our Slack channel?
Pavel, if you are available to unmute, if you would like to talk about that, we could.
Yeah, so very quickly, hello everyone, I just wanted to highlight our Slack channel, so in
case of questions, like you wanted to stay engaged with the developers, or simply ask a question,
what it is about, like I wanted to contribute, I wanted to learn, like give me some helping hands,
like provide me some assistance with the very first steps, this is a very great place to learn,
to connect, and talk to us, so just wanted to call it out, because I know that this has been
used so far a few times, and that's proved to be very effective, so just another communication
channel to reach out to us. Thanks Pavel, and I should have mentioned that when Mike asked his
question earlier, about why didn't you just do a CRAN task view, really it's the community building
that we're looking for here, and you don't get that from a CRAN task view, so yeah, the Slack
community is a great example of that. Yes, and hopefully we have the right link in here, ah okay
Rachel, I think Rachel's got it, I was also looking for it, I think it is pharmaverse.slack.com
for anybody who is listening, and has our screen on another monitor. Yeah, that's also, I should
say, living on our homepage, if you go to pharmaverse.org, and you scroll down, there's
like a list of FAQs, and these are the most common things people ask, how do I get involved, and how
do I join the community, there's a link there, a direct link that will take you, and add you to our
pharmaverse Slack, there's also a link for how do you get things into pharmaverse, how do you propose
a package to be added, so that FAQ on the front page, it's also worth just visiting our homepage,
because there's some really nice visuals there, like one visual is, there's a really nice text
wall, which is dynamically created with all our packages, and I think we're on like 40 or 50
packages now, which is really, you know, it's amazing how fast that's grown, but there's also
a nice like network graph of people's GitHub profile picture, and it shows where they're
working, so you can look to any single contributor to the pharmaverse, and you can see that most
often, they don't just end up working on one package in isolation, they end up getting linked
to other people via the community, and they contribute to multiple packages, and yeah, again,
that's like the graph that we always hoped that we would see. That's so heartwarming, it's so
heartwarming, thank you so much. Well, we have about 15 minutes left, if you have a question, get it
in on Slido, and I wanted to call on Nathan to ask his question live, because I have the same question.
Hi, thanks, yeah, sorry, I'm just gonna have to find my question again. So obviously data science
in pharma, you think of randomized controlled trials, is that still where the bulk of the focus
is, or is work also being done with observational data, and if so, what approaches are being used to
understand data from outside controlled experimental settings?
Yeah, good question, Nathan. In my space, in the area that I work, it's definitely all around
clinical trials, and yeah, maybe randomized clinical trials, still the gold standard,
but there's definitely a lot more areas where we're looking at real world data evidence,
and observational studies, so it's definitely a growing area. I will say that it's an area
where health authorities also have to evolve along with the sponsor companies, because it's quite
often that we can show evidence from these, but still randomized clinical trials are seen as the
gold standard. So I think time will tell, and I hope that these areas have more and more of a key
role to play, because naturally we don't want to put, we want to reduce the patient burden as much
as possible, but it's definitely an evolving space, and we definitely need regulators to
kind of really open themselves to looking at real world data trials as well, and looking at the
benefits of looking at real world data, you know, for things like historical controls and many other
reasons. Yeah, hope that helps. I was going to say, I hope that helps, Nathan, but then I think
you'll get muted, so I'm going to stop saying that. Sorry, Libby. No, it's okay, Nathan. I
really appreciate you asking that question, because I really have the same question always.
Every time I meet somebody from a new place, I'm like, oh, that person also does data,
but that doesn't mean I know anything about what they do, and what their data looks like,
what their challenges are, what type of methods they're using, what matters to their leadership,
like I have no idea. So I really appreciate that. There's a little follow on an anonymous question,
which is, is clinical trials experience a requirement for entering your field? Do you
feel like that is? No. No, I didn't have clinical trial experience when I joined. Yeah, so no,
absolutely not. And we bring people from all kinds of backgrounds. So obviously a lot of people come
with maths backgrounds, or statistics, or medical statistics, but we get kind of computer science
graduates, or yeah, many different areas end up falling into the pharma industry. So no,
it's definitely not a prerequisite. Awesome. Thank you.
Alrighty, I, by this time in an hour, I feel like I usually have asked a career advice question
already, or I'm burning to ask one. So I would love to know if you have a piece of career advice
to share with everybody that has either been impactful for you, or maybe it was shared with you,
and you really, you really liked it, and you'd like to pass it on.
Yeah, definitely. So I think learn from the people around you, and learn from the people
that you respect, and learn pieces of their behavior, and the way that they do their work,
that you want to aspire to replicate. I used to see great presenters, and I would just watch them
enough hours, and pick little things of the way that they did presentations. I mean,
I would like to emulate that. So I also worked under great leaders where, you know, people would
be overseeing kind of hundreds and hundreds of people, but they would still make you feel like
they always had time for you. They would always be super approachable, no matter how, what level of
seniority they grew to. I thought, wow, I really want to be that approachable, no matter what level
I get to in this business. Also, I saw people go the other way, and I saw things where their
behaviors, I thought, wow, I absolutely don't want to emulate that. There's a lot of egos in
leadership, and there's a lot of people actually think, wow, I wouldn't want to work with that
person. So I always, you know, try to then stay humble, and try to stay approachable, and try to
actually know that you don't need to be the cleverest person in the room all the time.
Actually appreciate people around you, understand where they're better at things than you are, and
learn from them. And especially when you become, like, older, and you become more, you kind of go
up some kind of career ladder, it's sometimes, it's very easy for you to rest on your laurels,
and think, hey, I've learned all I need to now, I can survive. Actually, go speak to the people
that are coming in, the junior new starters, and they're coming in with things that they studied,
which weren't even, you know, existing when back when you studied. So they're coming in with all
these new great areas that you can really learn from, but be open to that, and don't feel like,
you know, you ever need to feel embarrassed about asking kind of questions, or you feel, oh, wow, I'm
a senior leader now, so everybody should look up to me, and they should respect me. Actually, people
will respect you more if you show that humility, and that vulnerability. That's how you build human
connections, and I think that that's the biggest thing that I'd say, especially coming from, like,
a technical background. I think, don't forget that the human connections are the most important
thing about everything we do. So yeah, that's really a collection of little tips from my side.
I love that so much. I feel like I can co-sign on all of those things. The human connections
being the most important thing, the vulnerability and humility being one of the things that drives
connection, especially with leaders and trust, absolutely. And there's another question in Slido
that I'd love to tack on to this career advice question, which was, do you have any suggestions
or recommendations for books or podcasts or anything else that you like?
I'm the worst person to recommend podcasts. Sorry. I'm like, yeah, I really, I do. The book I
recommend is around, like, situational leadership, so going around situational leadership 2.0 is
really nice. So when I first became a people manager, I was like, what kind of leader am I
going to be? What kind of manager am I going to be? And then, actually, somebody who is, like,
a great kind of mentor of mine, he was kind of coaching me, and he said, you need to be the
leader that each individual needs you to be for them. So it's not like one size fits all. You
can't just say, hey, this is my management style, and that's going to work on anyone. So I did a
lot of reading about situational leadership, and that, for me, really helped. You're going to see
that, you know, you can have two people, and they can be the similar level of experience, but
you need to kind of support them and coach them in totally different ways. And I think that's
something that really kind of stuck with me. So, yeah, I definitely recommend if you're going to
move it into leadership, anything reading around situational leadership is going to be a plus. But
sorry, I'm terrible with podcasts. Yeah, so I don't have any to recommend. Yeah.
Oh, no, that's okay. Well, you know, I will go ahead and plug Kat Hicks' podcast, which we had
Kat Hicks on before our break, so a few weeks ago. Her podcast is called Change Technically,
a few weeks ago. And I have been listening to it since we had her on, and I thoroughly enjoy it,
so go check out Change Technically. And then also, we had a couple of people adding some
suggestions in the chat, so definitely go take a look at the chat. Our community members are
suggesting books and podcasts, which I will cosign on all of those as well. Thank you so much for
indulging our podcast and book suggestion cravings. I have a couple of more questions here
that are about things that the chat might be able to help us with, but I do want to get your opinion
on them as well. So one person had asked, Renee had asked, what data science professional bodies
would you recommend joining? And somebody had replied and said, Informs is a good one. I used
to be a member of Informs. I like that as well. But Ross, do you have any others in mind,
any associations or memberships? Yeah, so the one that's really big in pharmaceuticals, and this is
the one that I kind of have the largest connection with is FUSE. So this is like a pharmaceutical
data science user group. It started off being very pharmaceutical statistical programming focused,
very much like clinical and statistical programmers, but it definitely broadened to
bringing kind of data managers, people working in kind of different kinds of endpoints and digital
health. So it's really kind of broadened nowadays and even feels like AI as well. You see a lot of
topics there. So I personally really like that because it's people knowledge sharing, people
getting together, people connecting, but in an area that's very relevant to the work I do. So
personally, that's been great for me. And actually, one thing I should say is like,
Pharmavis started as a very independent organization. We were just kind of building
from the ground up, doing our own thing. And over time, FUSE saw the movement that we're having and
saw how we were really influencing the industry. And they really did all they could to lift us up.
And they really kind of supported us. They opened us up to the whole community where they had, you
know, like tens of thousands of people. They've been doing this so many more years than we have.
And in the end, it kind of culminated with us becoming part of FUSE. And we're now kind of
officially listed as like one of their working groups. It doesn't really change anything. We
still do the same that we're doing, but they're kind of, you know, if we need like funding or we
need to run events or we need more outreach, they're doing all they can to lift us up and to
help push the industry collaboration forward. So yeah, FUSE, you know, have a kind of vested
interest because they've done so much for Pharmavis. So we're very appreciative.
Awesome. Everybody go check out FUSE. That is one that I have heard before,
but had not really understood even that it was connected to Pharma.
It's just like a word and a thing, a conference that I see,
see talked about. So that's awesome. All right. We had a couple more questions that I think we
can squeeze in, even though we only have a few minutes left, because there were two questions
about AI. And I would love to just combine those together and I'll put them in a chat as well.
So one was, how do you think AI can help accelerate some of the bottlenecks you're
facing in the Pharma industry? And the other one was like, how do you see AI agents and workflows
sort of influencing or changing the Pharma ecosystem over the next three to five years
or the Pharmaverse ecosystem? Yeah, great question. So I can say like,
it's already started to change. I think the majority of people working in data science
in Pharma now are using AI regularly. I use it daily. So firstly, it can be a great coding
assistant. So whether you use something like a copilot and it's there in your computing environment
and day-to-day you're interacting with it, or it's just something like Gemini, where it's
kind of something you're chatting to and you're having that kind of discussion and that context.
I personally prefer the discussion mode because I like to see, usually it's my prompt, the bad
thing. I haven't given it enough information. I've assumed too much knowledge, but quite often
with some back and forth and I'm going to see through my knowledge and my experience, I know
the bits where the hallucinations and from the right discussion, I can get out some great code
that I can reuse or something that can save me a lot of time. So, but generally in our industry,
it's kind of a couple of things. So one is around kind of knowledge management and trying to kind
of help that there's so many processes, so many things that you have to learn in a highly regulated
industry and the human brain can only absorb so much. So having AI kind of go over the
massive amount of standard operating procedures and documentation that we throw at our people,
it really helps for kind of chatbots and quick Q&A. Then also there's the coding assistance side.
It's definitely helping people to learn new languages and to become more confident in coding.
But the most interesting thing that I'm looking forward to is as we're starting to kind of use
these multi-agent approaches and kind of workflow automation combined with AI, because we're finding
that now that we've got like this foundation of these amazing tools like the Pharmaverse,
a lot of our work you can kind of harmonize and standardize to the point where you can automate,
but then there's always like the 20% which is like study specific, protocol specific,
and you need that bit of context or understanding or you need to make a choice. So if the AI can
make predictions there, well ultimately you automate the bit you can, but then the human
is in the loop to ultimately make the final decision, that's the bit that's kind of taking
us real forward. Because yeah, automation kind of works so far, but then it always hits a bottleneck
where you say we can't automate that because it's always going to need some human input. But
when you combine that automation and AI, the AI can make a prediction if you give it enough context.
But as long as the human's there to kind of ultimately decide is that the right prediction
or to correct the AI where needed, I think that's really exciting. So I see that it's
basically speeding us up. It's an accelerant. There's a lot of people out there fear it's
going to replace us and yeah, natural people, yeah I understand people's fear, but for me I see
we could do so much more. And in a field like data science where our demand is only growing,
there are so many other areas outside of clinical trial reporting that my company are crying out
for data science skills, but we just don't have the resource because we're so focused on
delivering our clinical trial submissions. So anything we can do to speed up and to make it
easier to do our day-to-day work, it's opening us up to actually solving more fun problems,
solving new areas and bringing new areas of value to the business. So I find it a really exciting
time. I also understand the anxiety naturally around people when they're facing this ever
changing technology. Yes, I've definitely felt the anxiety too, especially anytime anyone talks
about vibe coding, I get a little nervous and anxious and that's something that, you know,
I heard the term vibe coding for the very first time on the data science hangout from Abigail
Haddad asking a question and me going, wait, what is vibe coding? Okay, everybody, this has been
wonderful. We are at the top of our hour. I know everyone's going to have to jump for meetings or
lunch. So I will say thank you, Ross, so much for hanging out with us. This has been informative
and wonderful. I hope everybody enjoyed it. And I will say there's little three dots at the top of
the chat. Go click that. If you want to save the chat, click the three dots, save chat. Ross,
thanks for being with us. All right. Thank you for having me. Take care, everybody.